### Details on the SAM output generated by GraphMap

Description of special tags in the SAM output:  
- **ZE** - The E-value. More accurately - a pesimistic approximation of the E-value obtained by rescoring the generated alignment with scores/penalties for which pre-calculated Gumbel parameters exist. Concretely, scores/penalties are: ```match = 5, mismatch = -4, gap_open = -8, gap_extend = -6```. By default, there is no threshold on the E-value so even weak homologies would be reported, but there is a parameter which provides this functionality (```-z```), e.g.: ```-z 1e0```.  
- **ZF** - An internal parameter for quality of alignment calculated using equation (8) in our preprint: (http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/06/10/020719). In GraphMap, potential regions for a read are sorted by this parameter, and the primary alignment is the one with the largest ZF value. ZF values for different reads are not mutually comparable.  
- **ZQ** - Query (read) length.
- **ZR** - Reference length.  
- **H0** - Specified by SAM format as the "number of perfect hits", GraphMap reports here the number of possible mapping positions with the same number of kmer hits.
- **NM** - Edit distance, specified by the SAM format.  
- **AS** - Alignment score, specified by the SAM format.  

There are two hidden gems in GraphMap's output, providing more detailed reporting of the alignment process. Compiling GraphMap with ```make testing``` will generate a binary file on path ```bin/graphmap-not_release```. Running this version using parameter ```-b 3``` will generate a more verbose version of the SAM output file:
- **X3** - A string containing very verbose information about the alignment of a particular read.
- **X4** - Measurement of the CPU time spent on major parts of the algorithm, in a human-readible text format.  
